Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA 200-301. If you
like these videos, please subscribe to follow
along with the series. Also, please like and
leave a comment, and share the video to help
spread this free series of videos. Thanks
for your help. Also, remember to download
and use the Anki flashcards with the link
in the description, which will help you very
much in remembering what you have learned.
Let’s get started.
This is the 7th lecture in the series. In
the past couple videos we talked about Ethernet
LAN switching, for example within this small
network of PCs, attached to a switch. In this
video, however, we’ll start to expand our
horizon, and take a look at how traffic is
forwarded not WITHIN a LAN, but between different
LANs. Basically, we are going up the OSI model
from Layer 2, the data link layer, to Layer
3, the network layer. Let’s do a quick review
of Layer 3.
This slide is from Day 3’s video on the
OSI model. Let’s review some characteristics
of Layer 3, the Network layer. The network
layer provides connectivity between end hosts
on DIFFERENT networks, outside of the local
area network. Layer 3 provides logical addressing,
specifically IP addresses. Where Layer 2
uses MAC addresses, which are assigned to
the device when it is made, IP addresses are
logical addresses you assign when you configure
the device. Layer 3 provides path selection
between source and destination. Over larger,
more complex networks, for example the Internet,
there can be many different possible paths
to a destination. Selecting the best path
to the destination is part of Layer 3’s
functionality. Routers operate at Layer 3.
So far in this course we haven’t talked
much about routers. That’s going to change
over these next few videos, however, as we
talk about Layer 3. In this video, our focus
will be specifically on the logical Layer
3 addresses, IP addresses.
You may recognize this network from the previous
videos on Ethernet LAN switching. These PCs
are all connected by switches, so they are
part of the same network. These Layer 2 devices,
switches, do not separate different networks.
They connect and expand networks. I could
connect two more switches, each with multiple
PCs connected to them, to this network, and
it would still be one network, one LAN. Because
of this, the PCs all have IP addresses in
the same Layer 3 network, 192.168.1.0/24.
PC1’s IP address is 192.168.1.1, PC2’s
IP address is 192.168.1.2, PC3’s IP address
is 192.168.1.3, and PC4’s IP address is
192.168.1.4. If PC1 sends a broadcast frame
with a destination MAC address of all Fs,
After SW1 receives the frame, it will broadcast
it out all of its interfaces except the
one it was received on,
so that means G0/1 and G0/2. SW2 will then
do the same with the frame, broadcasting it
out of all of its interfaces, except the one
it was received on.
so that means G0/0 and G0/1. As you can see,
all other PCs in the network have received
the frame. Now, what if I put a router between
SW1 and SW2?
Now I’ve put R1 in between the two switches.
Now instead of one network, the PCs have been
split into two networks. Let’s say SW1,
PC1, and PC2 are still on the 192.168.1.0/24
network, but now SW2, PC3 and PC4 are on the
192.168.2.0/24 network, with PC3 being 192.168.2.1
and PC4 being 192.168.2.2. You may have noticed
that, in these network IP addresses, the first
three groups of numbers, 192.168.1, and 192.168.2,
represent the network itself, and only this
last 0 changes to represent the end hosts
on the network, the PCs. You may also have
wondered what these /24s mean at the end.
Actually, they are used to tell what part
of the address represents the network, and
which part represents the end hosts, the PCs.
/24 means that the first 3 groups of numbers
represent the network. In this video I’m
going to go in depth about how these IP addresses
work. But first, there’s one more thing
missing in this network diagram. The router
needs an IP address. Actually, not just one
IP address, it needs an IP address for each
network it is connected to. So, let’s give
R1’s G0/0 interface an IP address of 192.168.1.254,
and it’s G0/1 interface an IP address of
192.168.2.254.
This time, if R1 sends a frame to the broadcast
MAC address of all Fs, SW1 will receive the
frame,
and it will forward it out of all of interfaces
except the one the frame was received on.
So, it sends the frame out of G0/1 and G0/2,
and PC2 and R1 receive the frame. However,
that’s where it ends. The broadcast is limited
to the local network, it doesn’t cross the
router and go to SW2, PC3, and PC4. I’ll
go more into detail about routing and Layer
3 forwarding, but as I said, this video will
focus on IP addresses themselves, so let’s
take a look.
This is a chart from Wikipedia showing the
IP version 4 header. IP, or Internet protocol,
is the primary layer 3 protocol in use today,
and version 4 is the version in use in most
networks. As you can see, there are a lot
of different fields in the IPv4 header, more
than in the Ethernet header. We’ll talk
more about the IPv4 header in another video,
so today let’s look at these two fields,
the source IP address and destination IP address.
These fields are both 32-bits in length, as you
can see they stretch from 0 to 31 in this
chart. So, IP addresses are 32-bits, or 4
bytes, in length.
Let’s take a look at this IPv4 address,
192.168.1.254. An IPv4 address is 32 bits
long, so each of these four groups of numbers
represents 8 bits. 192 represents 8 bits,
168 represents 8 bits, 1 represents 8 bits,
and 254 also represents 8 bits. If we write these
8 bits out as 1s and 0s, 192 is 11 00 00 00,
168 is 10 10 10 00, 1 is 00 00 00 01, and
254 is 11 11 11 10. This way of writing numbers
using just 0s and 1s is called binary. However,
binary is difficult to read and understand for
us humans, so IP addresses are written using
what’s called dotted decimal, because there
are four decimal numbers, 192, 168, 1, and
254, separated by dots, or periods. Let’s spend some
time learning about binary, which is important
to understand IPv4 addresses.
Before looking at binary, let’s review decimal
and hexadecimal. In decimal, also known as
base 10, each digit increases by a factor
of 10. For example, this number 3294 consists
of 1 unit of 4, 9 units of 10, 2 units of 100, and 3 units of 1000.
Notice that they increase by a factor of 10.
1 x 10 is 10. 10 x 10 is 100. 100 x 10 is
1000, and next would be 1000 x 10, which is
ten thousand. Now, let’s look at this number
in hexadecimal. Decimal 3294 is written in
hexadecimal as C D E. How does that work?
Well, the first digit represents 1s, so this
is E times 1, and E = 14, so that equals 14.
The next digit increases by a factor of 16,
and 1 * 16 is 16 of course, so this is D times
16, and D in hexadecimal is equal to 13, making this equal to decimal
208. Finally, the next digit increases by
a factor of 16 once again, and 16 times 16
is equal to 256, so this is C times 256. In hexadecimal, C is equal to 12, so this is equal to decimal 3072.
If you add those numbers up, you get 3294. So,
that’s a quick review of decimal and hexadecimal.
Now let’s look at binary.
So, looking back at this IP address 192.168.1.254,
let’s look at how each of these numbers
is written in binary, starting with 192, which
is 11 00 00 00.
Binary is base 2, meaning each digit increases
by a factor of 2, it doubles. So, that means
that this 11 00 00 00 really is 0 1s, then
1 x 2 is 2, so 0 2s, then 2 x 2 is 4, so 0
4s, then 4 x 2 is 8, so 0 8s, then 8 x 2 is
16, so 0 16s, 16 x 2 is 32, so 0 32s, 32 x
2 is 64, so 1 64, and 64 x 2 is 128, so 1
128 If you add 128 and 64 together, you get
192.
Next let’s look at how 168 is converted
to binary, which is 10 10 10 00.
So, 10 10 10 00 in binary means 1 unit of
128, 1 unit of 32, and 1 unit of 8. 128 plus
32 plus 8 is equal to 168.
Next up is 1, which is the decimal representation
of binary 00 00 00 01.
This is pretty simple. 1 is equal to 1 unit
of 1. Let’s go to the last 8 bits of the
IP address.
254 is equal to 11 11 11 10 in binary. Let’s
take a look.
Binary 11 11 11 10 represents 1 unit of 128,
1 unit of 64, 1 unit of 32, 1 unit of 16,
1 unit of 8, 1 unit of 4, and 1 unit of 2.
Add those all together, and you get 254.
So, hopefully you have an idea of how binary
works now. Before we do some practice converting
between decimal and binary, I want to teach
you one more term. You’ll often hear each
of these 8 bit groups referred to as ‘octets’.
Now, let’s get some practice converting
binary octets to decimal.
Here’s an example. We have a binary octet
of 10 00 11 11. How can we go about converting
this to decimal? First, I recommend writing
the value of each binary digit over the binary
numbers. You can start with 1 on the right,
and then multiply by 2 for each digit as you
move to the left. Or if you prefer, start
by writing 128 over the digit on the left,
and divide by 2 as you move to the right.
Once you have written these values, simply
add up the value of each 1, and you get the
answer. 128 + 8 + 4 + 2 + 1 equals 143. So,
binary 10 00 11 11 is equal to decimal 143.
Let’s do another example.
Now we have binary 01 11 01 10. Once again,
write the value of each binary digit over
the octet. So, we have 1 unit of 64, 1 unit
of 32, 1 unit of 16, 1 unit of 4, and 1 unit
of 2. Add each of those numbers together,
and you get the answer, which is 118. So,
binary 01 11 01 10 is equal to decimal 118.
What is binary 11 10 11 00 in decimal? This
time I won’t display the value of each binary
digit above. Write down the number yourself,
or try to do the calculation in your head.
Pause the video to figure out the answer.  Got it? 128 + 64 + 32 + 8 + 4 equals
236. Okay, we’ll do some more binary to
decimal conversion practice in the quiz for
today’s video, let’s move on.
Now let’s try converting in the opposite
direction, from decimal to binary. We have
the decimal number 221, how can we go about
converting it to binary? I recommend writing
out the values of each bit in a binary octet,
like this. Then, starting from 128, try to
subtract each number from the decimal number
you’re trying to convert. As you can see,
we can subtract 128 from 221, so write a 1
under 128. Now, we’ve got 93 left, can we
subtract 64 from 93? Yes we can, and we’re
left with 28. So, write a 1 under 64. Next,
can we subtract 32 from 28? Well, we can,
but we’d end up with a negative number,
so for our purposes, no we can’t. So, write
a 0 under 32. Next, 16 is smaller than 28,
so let’s subtract 16 from 28. We’re left
with 12, and write a 1 under 16. Next is 8,
and it’s smaller than 12, so let’s subtract
8 from 12 and write a 1 under 8. Next, subtract
4 from 4, and write a 1 under 4. We’re left
with 0, so we can’t subtract any further.
That means we can just write 0 and 2 and 1.
So, there’s our answer. Decimal 221 is equivalent
to binary 11 01 11 00 (**WRONG: CHECK ERRATA**).
Let’s do another example. Let’s convert
decimal 127 to binary. Try to figure it out
yourself first. Pause the video to find the
answer. Okay, hopefully you found the answer,
let’s check. We can’t subtract 128 from
127, so write a 0 under 128. We can subtract
64 from 127, which leaves 63, and I’ll write
a 1 under 64. Then subtract 32 from 63, and
write a 1 under 32, and we’re left with 31.
Next subtract 16 from 31, 15 remains,
and write a 1 under 16. Subtract 8 from
15, and write a 1 under 8. You’re left with
7, so subtract 4 from 7 , you get 3, and write
a 1 under 4. Subtract 2 from 3, and write
a 1 under 2. Finally, subtract 1 from 1 and
you’re left with 0. There’s our answer.
Decimal 127 in binary is 01 11 11 11.
Let’s do one more example of decimal to
binary conversion. Again, try to find the
answer yourself. Write down the numbers and
convert decimal 207 to binary. Pause the video
to think about your answer.  Okay, hopefully
you found the answer, let’s check. First,
write out the values for each bit of the binary
octet. Subtract 128 from 207, and write a
1 under 128. Subtract 64 from 79, and write
a 1 under 64. We can’t subtract 32 from
15, so write a 0 under 32. You can’t subtract
16 from 15 either, so write a 0 under 16.
Subtract 8 from 15, and write a 1 under 8.
Subtract 4 from 7, and write a 1 under 4.
Subtract 2 from 3, and write a 1 under 2.
And finally, subtract 1 from 1 and you get 0.
There’s the answer. Decimal 207 is equivalent
to 11 00 11 11 in binary.
Before moving on, you probably figured this
out by yourself already, but the range of
possible numbers that can be represented with
8 binary bits ranges from 0, if all bits are
0, to 255, if all bits are 1, because 128
+ 64 + 32 + 16 + 8 + 4 + 2 + 1 equals 255.
So, an IPv4 address is really a series of
32 bits. It is split up into 4 octets, and
then written in dotted decimal format to make
it simpler for us humans to read and understand.
However, you may remember there was this /24
that I said was used to identify which part
of the IP address represents the network and
which represents the end host. Since an IP
address is 32 bits, can you guess what this
/24 means?  It means that the first 24
bits of this IP address represent the network
portion of the address, and the remaining
8 represent the end host.
So, the first 24 bits is equal to the first
3 octets, because 8 + 8 + 8 equals 24.
So 192.168.1 is the network portion of the
address, and 254 is the host portion.
Here’s a quick look back at our small network.
The IP address of PC1, PC2, and R1’s G0/0
interface are 192.168.1.1/24, 192.168.1.2/24,
and 192.168.1.254/24. Notice that the network
portion of each IP address is the same, because
they are all part of the same local network,
only the host portion is different. Likewise,
the IP addresses of PC3, PC4, and R1’s G0/1
interface are 192.168.2.1/24, 192.168.2.2/24,
and 192.168.2.254/24, only the host portion
of the address is different because they are
on the same local area network.
Let’s follow the same process as before
with another IP address. If you want some
extra practice, try to convert these 32 binary
bits into an IPv4 address. Pause the video
if you want to try to find the answer on your
own. Okay, so the 32 bits can be split into
4 octets like this. Then the four octets can
be converted into dotted decimal like this.
This time, /16 is used instead of /24. Which
portion is the network portion and which is
the host portion?
Well, /16 means the first 16 bits, or the
first half, are the network portion. So, the
first two octets are the network portion,
and the last two octets are the host portion.
Therefore, 154.78 is the network portion,
and 111.32 is the host portion. Let’s do
one more example.
Here’s another IPv4 address. Try to convert
these 32 bits into dotted decimal. Pause the
video now if you want to try. Okay, so you
can divide the 32 bits into 4 octets like
this, and then convert the octets into dotted
decimal like this. This time, it’s /8. So,
which part of the address is the network portion,
and which is the host portion?
Since the first 8 bits are the network portion,
that means that the first octet is the network
portion, and the last three octets are the
host portion.
So 12 is the network portion, and 128.251.23
is the host portion.
Now, IPv4 addresses are split up into 5 different
‘classes’. The class of an IPv4 address
is determined by the first octet of the address.
The first is class A, which has a first octet
beginning with 0. If the first octet begins
with 0, that means that the numeric range
of the first octet is from 0 to 127, because
64 + 32 + 16 + 8 + 4 + 2 + 1 gives a maximum
of 127. The second class is class B, which
has a first octet beginning with 1 0, and
therefore a numeric range of 128 to 191. The
third class is class C, which has a first
octet beginning with 1 1 0, and therefore
the numeric range for the first octet is 192
to 223. Class D has a first octet beginning
with 1 1 1 0, and the numeric range of the
first octet is 224 to 239. Finally, class
E has a first octet beginning with 1111, and
therefore the numeric range for the first
octet is 240 to 255.
However, the classes of address we’ll be
focusing on are A, B, and C. Addresses in
class D are reserved for ‘multicast’ addresses.
Multicast is another type of address, separate
from the unicast and broadcast addresses we
talked about in previous videos. We will talk
about them, but that will be later in the
course. Class E addresses are reserved for
experimental uses, and we won’t talk about them
in this course. Now, one more thing about
the Class A range. The end of the class A
range is usually considered to be 126, NOT
127. Why is that? Let’s take a look.
The 127 range is reserved for ‘loopback
addresses’. The range is anything with a
first octet of 127, so 127.0.0.0 to 127.255.255.255.
These addresses are used to test the ‘network
stack’ of the local device. If a device
sends any network traffic to an address in
this range, it is simply processed back up
the TCP/IP stack as if it were traffic received
from another device. In this image, I pinged
127.0.0.1 on my windows PC, and you can see
the responses. My PC is responding to its
own pings. In this image, I sent a ping to
a random IP address in the 127 range, 127.23.68.241,
and again my PC responds back to its own ping.
Notice the round trip times, all 0 milliseconds.
That’s because the traffic isn’t going
anywhere, my PC is just sending and receiving
these pings to and from itself.
So here’s the chart again with just classes
A, B, and C. I’ve also added one more column,
the prefix length, which is the /8, /16, and
/24 which is used to identify the length of
the network portion of the address. Class
A addresses use a /8 prefix, Class B addresses
use a /16 prefix, and Class C addresses use
a /24 prefix.
Actually, if you look back at these three
addresses we used in our examples, you can
see they are , Class A, class B, and Class
C addresses, and their prefix lengths match
the table. /8 for class A, /16 for class B,
and /24 for class C. In class A, there are
fewer possible network addresses, however
because the network (*host) portion is very long,
there can be many hosts on each network. Class
C is the opposite, there are many more possible
networks, but because the host portion is
smaller there are fewer hosts on each network.
Let’s take a look at the numbers.
So, this is another chart I’ve taken off
of wikipedia. The leading bits column refers
to the first bits of the first octet, which
I displayed in my previous table. The ‘size
of network number bit field’ displays the
number of bits in the network portion of the
IP address, which as I mentioned is 8 for
class A, 16 for class B, and 24 for class
C. ‘size of rest bit field’ indicates
the remaining number of bits in the address, which is
the host portion of the address. 24 bits for
class A, 16 for class B, and 8 for class C.
Now, this part here displays the number of
possible networks in each class. As I said,
class A has fewer potential networks, but
more hosts in each network, class C is the
opposite, and class B is in between. Class
A has 128 possible networks, Class B has about
16,000 networks, and Class C has about 2 million
networks. Class A allows about 16.7 million
hosts in each network, Class B allows about
65,000 hosts in each network, and class C
allows 256 hosts in each network. However,
because the first address in each network
is the network address, it cant be assigned
to hosts. Also the last address of the network
is the broadcast address, the Layer 3 address
used when you want to send traffic to all
hosts, and it also can’t be assigned to hosts,
so really the host count is two less, for example
254 in class C.
Now I want to briefly talk about another way
of writing these prefix lengths. Using a slash,
followed by the length of the prefix, is a
newer and easier way of writing the prefix
length. On Juniper network devices, for example,
you write prefix lengths using this slash
notation. However, Cisco devices still use
an older, slightly more complicated way of
writing the prefix length. That is using a
dotted decimal netmask. A netmask is written
in dotted decimal like an IP address, where
the network portion is all 1s and the host
portion is all 0s. For example, the network
mask of a class A address is 255.0.0.0. That’s
the dotted decimal version of 11 11 11 11,
followed by 24 zeroes. So, what do you think
the netmask of a Class B address is?... It’s
255.255.0.0, which is two octets of 1s, followed
by two octets of zeroes, written in dotted
decimal. Finally, what do you think the netmask
of a Class C address is?  It’s 255.255.255.0,
which is three octets of 1s, followed by 1
octet of zeroes, again written in dotted decimal
notation. So, these prefix lengths and these
netmasks are the same things, just written
in different ways.
Before moving on to the quiz for today’s
video, I want to explain two more types of
IP addresses which I briefly mentioned before, the network and broadcast addresses.
If the host portion of an IP address is all
0’s, it means it is the Network address,
the identifier of the network itself. In our
diagram here, you can see 192.168.1.0/24.
We know that /24 means the first three octets
are the network portion, and the last octet
is the host portion. Since, the host portion
is 0, it means the last octet, the host portion,
is all 0s. Therefore, this address, 192.168.1.0/24,
is the network address. Keep in mind, the
network address cannot be assigned to a host.
The network address is the first address of
the network, but the first USABLE address
is one above the network address, in this
case it’s 192.168.1.1, which is assigned
to PC1.
So, the network address is the first address,
with a host portion of all 0s. However, the
LAST address in a network, with a host portion
of all 1s, is the broadcast address for the
network. Like the network address, the broadcast
address CANNOT be assigned to a host. So although
it’s the last address in the network the
last USABLE address is actually 1 under the
broadcast address, in this case, that’s
192.168.1.254, the address assigned to R1’s
G0/0 interface.
So, the broadcast address is the layer 3 address
used to send a packet to all hosts on the
local network. If a packet is sent with this
destination IP address, what do you think
will be the destination MAC address of the
frame it is encapsulated in? Think about the
Ethernet LAN switching videos... it will be
all F’s, the broadcast MAC Address. If PC1,
for example, sent a ping to 192.168.1.255,
it would be received by PC2 and R1’s G0/0
interface.
Once again, I think we’ve covered a lot
of ground in this video. Let’s list what
we covered before moving on to today’s quiz.
First, I talked about dotted decimal and binary.
Binary is how computers think, but 32 bit
IPv4 addresses are difficult to remember for
us humans, so we convert IPv4 addresses to
dotted decimal form to make them easier to
read and remember. You learned that IPv4 addresses
consist of a network portion and a host portion.
Hosts on the same network will have the same
network portion, but a unique host portion
of their IP addresses. You learned about the
IPv4 address classes.  We looked at the
different ways of indicating the length of
the network prefix, by writing the prefix
length with a slash or by using a netmask.
and finally, you learned about the network
address, which has a host portion of all 0s,
and is used to identify the network itself,
not any particular host on the network. Also, the broadcast
address, which has a host portion of all 1s,
which is used to send network traffic to all
hosts on the network.
So, before moving on to the quiz I want to
remind you to download and use the flashcards
for this lesson to help you remember what
you’ve studied in this lesson. Now, for
today’s quiz, I’m going to focus exclusively
on converting IPv4 addresses between binary
and dotted decimal. There will be 10 questions,
instead of the usual 5, and hopefully afterward
you’ll feel confident converting IPv4 addresses
between binary and dotted decimal. Let’s
get started.
Question 1. Convert the following IPv4 address
to dotted decimal notation. Pause the video
to solve the question, then unpause to check
your answer.
The answer is 63.56.231.19. Let’s go the question 2.
Convert the following IPv4 address to dotted
decimal notation. Pause the video to solve
the question, then unpause to check your answer.
The answer is 243.127.98.1. Let’s go question 3.
Convert the following IPv4 address to dotted
decimal notation. Pause the video to solve
the question, and unpause to check your answer.
The answer is 111.6.89.199. Let’s go question 4.
Convert the following IPv4 address to dotted
decimal notation. Pause the video to solve
the question, and unpause to check your answer.
The answer is 207.198.47.76. Let’s go question 5.
Convert the following IPv4 address to dotted
decimal notation. Pause the video to solve
the question, and unpause to check your answer.
The answer is 100.201.33.253. Let’s go question 6.
Convert the following IPv4 address to binary
notation. 88.46.90.91. Pause the video to
solve the question, and unpause to check your
answer. And here’s the answer. Let's go
to question 7.
Convert the following IPv4 address to binary
notation. 221.234.246.163. Pause the video
to solve the question, and unpause to check
your answer. And here’s the answer. Let's
go to question 8.
Convert the following IPv4 address to binary
notation. 3.41.143.222. Pause the video to
solve the question, and unpause to check your
answer. And here’s the answer. Let's go
to question 9.
Convert the following IPv4 address to binary
notation. 10.200.231.91. Pause the video to
solve the question, and unpause to check your
answer. And here’s the answer. Let's go
to question 10.
Convert the following IPv4 address to binary
notation. 248.87.255.152. Pause the video
to solve the question, and unpause to check
your answer. And here’s the answer.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz, I hope you
feel confident converting IPv4 addresses between
binary and dotted decimal notation. As usual,
there will be supplementary materials to help
you review what you’ve learned. There will
be review flashcards using Anki, which I highly
recommend you download and use to review.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab, however it will be after Part 2’s video,
so there won’t be a lab for today’s video
specifically. Good luck with your studies.
Thank you for watching. Please subscribe to
the channel, like the video, leave a comment,
and share the video with anyone else studying
for the CCNA. If you want to leave a tip,
check the links in the description. I'm also
a Brave verified publisher, and accept BAT,
or Basic Attention Token, tips via the Brave
browser.  That's all for now.